(upbeat music)
(soft music)
- [Voiceover] Along with
the continued cultivation
of some popular ancient grains
like quinoa, wheat,
barley, and rice
is the preservation of
their long histories.
Accounts of their
origins and survival
thousands of years ago
have been handed down
from one generation to the next.
But the same thing
can not be said
for the ancient
grain, khorasan wheat.
Aside from it's origin
there is also some dispute
over it's exact
taxonomic classification.
Scientists from
the United States,
Canada, Italy,
Israel, and Russia
have not been able to arrive
at a single conclusive result.
While all agree that it
belongs to Triticum specie
they can't agree on
it's sub species.
Based on early studies,
it has been identified
as polonicum, or Polish wheat.
But then some believe it is
a variety of durum wheat.
Today, most scientists identify
the grain sub
species as turanicum.
Most commonly called,
khorasan wheat.
And it's origin can be traced
back to the Fertile Crescent.
It's common name is derived from
the great Persian
province called, Khorasan.
Which is now divided
between Iran,
Afghanistan, Uzbekistan,
and Tajikistan.
Physically, khorasan
wheat doesn't stray far
from common wheat's features.
But it's grains are
two times bigger
and it's kernel
weighs up to 60 grams.
Believed to have
been first cultivated
in the Middle East.
Khorasan wheat is
tolerant to drought.
Because this grain didn't
travel far and wide,
like maize and barley,
it's adaptation
to varying climate and soil
conditions is difficult
if not impossible.
It still prefers the tempered
climate of the Middle East.
With an average range of
500 to 1,000 millimeters
of rain fall, and a
sunny warm summer,
too much precipitation
may lead to crop diseases.
Outside the Middle East region,
the most famous place in
the world that cultivates it
on a large scale is Montana
in the United States.
Khorasan wheat first reached
the United States in 1949.
But it didn't make any
impact among American farmers
until in 1977 when two
farmers from Montana,
Mack and Bob Quinn,
rediscovered it
and decided to start
cultivating it.
They succeeded and
eventually in 1990
they registered their cultivated
turanicum variety QK-77
as the trademark Kamut.
When asked if they
know khorasan wheat,
many people would
probably say no.
But in truth, they know it.
They just call it by a
different name, which is Kamut.
It must be noted that
Kamut is a brand name.
(soft music)
Compared to other
major ancient grains
khorasan wheat is
relatively unknown.
But with a gradual rise in
popularity of whole grains
it is an auspicious
era for khorasan wheat.
And it will have it's
moment in the sun.
(soft piano)
(upbeat music)
Wheat is a global
cereal favorite
because of it's
nutritional profile.
But it's values differ depending
on it's species or varieties.
As a relative of
wheat, khorasan wheat
also boasts of a very
impressive nutrient mineral
and vitamin composition.
A quarter cup of khorasan wheat
contains 27.91 grams
of carbohydrates.
6.81 grams of protein,
which is 30 percent higher
compared to common wheat.
And 5.25 grams of fiber.
For it's vitamin
content a quarter cup
has the following values,
.02 milligrams of folic acid,
.18 milligrams of vitamin B1,
3.02 milligrams of vitamin B3,
and 37 milligrams of vitamin E.
When it comes to it's minerals
it has the following
significant values
38.41 milligrams of Silicon,
1.44 milligrams of Zinc,
9.39 milligrams of Calcium,
1.73 milligrams of Iron,
.08 milligrams of Selenium,
1.49 milligrams of Manganese,
2.45 milligrams of Sodium,
64.03 milligrams of Magnesium,
143.78 milligrams of Phosphorus,
and an impressive 192.74
milligrams of Potassium.
Like most whole
grains, khorasan wheat
can reduce metabolic
risk factors
by lowering cholesterol
and blood sugar levels.
This is according
to a study published
in the European Journal
of Clinical Nutrition
in February 2013.
The Calcium, Magnesium,
Phosphorus, and Silicon
in khorasan wheat
can greatly benefit
the body's overall bone health.
Including prevention of
different kinds of arthritis
as well as osteoporosis.
Especially among women.
Khorasan wheat's Potassium
offers a wide array of benefits
that promote well being.
Potassium acts as the
body's electrolyte
maintaining smooth transmission
of electric charges
throughout the body.
Thus promoting better
brain function.
Hypoglycemic people who
often experience headaches
when their blood
sugar level drops
can find immediate
relief from the intake
of Potassium and Sodium.
Which are both found
abundantly in khorasan wheat.
It's high Potassium
content is also ideal
in maintaining
muscular strength.
Because this mineral is needed
for proper muscle contraction
and relaxation movements.
Eating khorasan wheat can
alleviate muscle cramps.
A quarter cup of khorasan wheat
also has 26.74 grams of starch.
But unlike the starches of
durum and other wheat varieties
khorasan wheat's starch is
two times more resistant.
Resistant starch, also
found in oats and corn
is basically a starch
that resists digestion
and is eventually
fermented by bacteria
commonly found in
the large intestine.
This fermentation then produces
short chain fatty acids,
like acetate, butyrate
and propionate
that can be associated with
specific health benefits.
Such as, improved cholesterol,
blood sugar levels,
and satiation.
Khorasan wheat is also a
good source of Selenium.
A mineral famous for it's
antioxidant properties.
Selenium is needed by the body
to maintain thyroid and
cognitive functions.
(soft piano)
Because of the re-emergence
of this grain in
the modern market
there is another exciting
whole grain variety
for people who are in search
of healthy organic options.
(soft piano)
(upbeat music)
Most grains of the ancient world
acquire different
names or monikers
as they traveled from
their place of origin
across oceans to new lands.
For example, South
America's maize
became popular in
Europe as corn.
Middle East Spelt is
more commonly known
in Italy as farro.
Khorasan wheat is also
called by many names.
While it is named after a great
Persian province called Khorasan
it is not definite that it
originated from that place.
In the United States it
is called King Tuts wheat.
Or Pharoah's wheat.
Perhaps this is
because of a story
that the first
khorasan wheat grains
that reached America were
taken from a stone box
in a tomb excavation in Egypt.
In Turkey, it's
nicknamed camel's tooth
because the grain's humpback
shape resembles camel's tooth.
Khorasan wheat also has
the moniker prophet's wheat
because according to legends
Noah brought it
with him on the ark.
Because cultivation
of khorasan wheat
has been limited for a long time
agriculturist haven't explored
it's uses beyond flour.
(upbeat music)
Khorasan wheat flour is a great
alternative to
common wheat flour.
But because it doesn't
contain as much gluten
as common wheat flour, it
usually requires the addition
of wheat gluten to give
baked goods structure.
The story of khorasan wheat
is different compared
to other grades.
Grades like barley,
quinoa, and maize
manage to remain and
reestablish themselves
in their homeland
as important crops
despite great odds and
other circumstances
like colonization,
invasions, and war.
The same can not be said
about khorasan wheat.
Despite originating
from the Middle East
scientist now don't have
definite proof or data
to support that this ancient
grain still exists there.
Some say that in the early 1900s
most of the local farmers
abandoned khorasan wheat
to grow common wheat instead.
Resulting in it's eventual
disuse and disappearance.
(soft piano)
The story of khorasan wheat
will serve as a lesson
to future generations.
And that is preservation
is necessary.
Whether it is a
small humble grain
or an enormous work of art.
Protecting them is protecting
an entire culture from oblivion.
(upbeat music)
From the ancient
cradle of civilization
called the Fertile Crescent,
sprung a diverse
taxonomy of grains.
Early cultivation
practices in that area
have resulted in the
production of a variety,
sub varieties, and sub
species of some grains.
Most of the grains
originating from this area
have traveled to
different continents
as early as the Bronze age.
Except for khorasan wheat.
Cultivation and
production of this grain
was confined to the near east
during most parts
of early history.
But this doesn't mean
that khorasan wheat
doesn't have it's own share
of extraordinary stories.
It crossed the Atlantic
ocean from Europe
to the United States in 1949.
A U.S. airman name Earl Dedman
who was stationed in
Portugal at that time
received 36 giant wheat
kernels from another airman
who obtained them from a tomb
excavation site in Egypt.
Dedman then sent these
kernels to his father
who lived in Fort
Benton, Montana U.S.A.
His father Rue Dedman planted
the grains in their farm.
32 out of the 36 kernels
successfully grew.
The Dedman family
continued planting khorasan
wheat for the next six years.
Before retiring from
farming, Rue Dedman
sold his 1,500 bushels
of khorasan wheat
to a company that used
it as cattle feed.
Dedman had retired.
But another local farmer
named Bernard Cooper
bought some seeds
from Dedman in 1956
and decided to grow the grain.
Another man who bought
six bushels from Dedman
was a mail carrier
named, Neil Archer.
Calling it King Tut's wheat,
Archer gave the grain
to people he met
while he carried
out his mail duties.
One summer, he
traveled to Florida
spreading and giving the
grains to at least 1000 people
from different
states like Florida,
Kansas, Missouri,
Iowa, South Dakota,
Texas, Alabama, and Washington.
Unfortunately, despite
it's great start in Montana
cultivation of khorasan
wheat was not sustained.
Until eventually it disappeared
around 1965 to 1976.
In 1977, T. Mack Quinn,
another farmer from Montana
acquired a jar of
khorasan wheat.
Together with his son Bob,
an agriculture scientist
from the University
of California Davis
spent the next years researching
on and breeding the grains.
Their efforts to discover
the origins of the grains
led them back to Egypt
when the U.S. airman
obtained the first
khorasan grains
that traveled to
the United States.
Though khorasan wheat
was widely grown in Egypt
it is still inconclusive
whether or not
it is where the grains
truly originate.
The father, son tandem
continued cultivating
and breeding it
until when in 1990
they decided to
register the name Kamut
as a brand of khorasan wheat
with specific attribute.
Kamut is an ancient
Egyptian word meaning wheat.
Since it belongs to
already dead language
the Quinns were allowed to
register it as a trademark.
Today khorasan wheat
is still widely planted
and harvested in Montana.
As well as in some areas
within North Dakota,
and Alberta, and
Saskatchewan in Canada.
The United States may
be the major player
in khorasan wheat
production today.
But Europe is the
wheat's largest market.
As a great flour to process
into pasta and breads
Italy is today's biggest
consumer of khorasan wheat.
This grain may not be as
adaptable as it's wheat cousins
in terms of cultivation.
But it's potential to acquire
a modest yet stable share
in the organic and
whole foods market
may outweigh some
of the drawbacks
involved in it's
production in the long run.
(upbeat music)
It is true that many are
unfamiliar with khorasan wheat.
But integration of
this ancient grain
into modern cuisine is
not really difficult.
Like maize, it's grains
can be eaten directly
or it can be milled into flour.
Those who have experimented
with khorasan wheat flour
actually found it very
suitable for baking
because of it's natural
buttery sweetness.
Cooking khorasan
wheat may require time
compared to other grains
like common wheat.
There are two ways
of cooking it.
First cooking it the
conventional way, stove top.
It is recommended that the
grains are soaked over night
to reduce actual cooking time.
Use one cup of
pre-soaked khorasan wheat
to three cups of water
and bring it to a boil.
Once it's boiling you
can add a pinch of salt.
Lower the heat and let
simmer for 40 to 45 minutes.
The second way of
cooking khorasan wheat
is using a pressure cooker.
Many prefer this
method because one,
soaking is not
necessary, and two,
it only takes about 20 minutes
until the grains are tender.
Cooking one cup of it
in a pressure cooker
would only require one and
a half to two cups of water.
Here are two recipes to give you
a refreshing taste
of this whole grain.
First, a simple
khorasan wheat salad.
You will need two cups
of cooked khorasan wheat.
One chopped orange.
One large cubed red bell pepper.
Six rinsed and chopped
sun dried tomatoes in oil.
One thinly sliced red onion.
One crushed clove of garlic.
One de-seeded and
chopped fresh red chili.
The juice of one lemon.
Two tablespoons of olive oil.
One teaspoon of sugar.
And salt and pepper to taste.
Prepare your khorasan wheat
using any of the methods
discussed earlier.
And let it cool for a while.
Once it's cooled, just toss it
and the rest of the ingredients
together in a large bowl.
Then refrigerate it for a
few hours before serving.
The second recipe you
can try is called,
Read Bean and
Khorasan Wheat Soup.
For this one, prepare the
following ingredients.
One cup of khorasan wheat.
Three tablespoons of
olive oil or butter.
One medium diced onion.
Three minced cloves of garlic.
Six cups of vegetable stock.
One and one half
cups of tomato puree.
Two cans of 425
gram can of beans.
Two tablespoons of chili powder.
Two teaspoons of dried thyme.
One half teaspoon
of cayenne pepper.
Three bay leaves.
And salt to taste.
Make sure to soak the
grains over night.
Then before cooking,
drain them very well.
First, in a large pot
heat olive oil or butter.
Saute the onion
until translucent.
And then add garlic.
Saute for at least a minute.
Add the khorasan wheat and
the rest of the ingredients.
Combine well, cover,
and then let it simmer
for 40 minutes to one
hour over low heat.
Don't forget to remove the
bay leaves before serving.
The uses of khorasan
wheat are as diverse
and versatile as common wheat.
So make sure to venture
into more cooking
and baking adventures
with this wonder grain.
(upbeat music)